Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane.
Science fiction is written by people with diverse backgrounds. The range covers the sciences, the humanities, and even the arts.
Paulo Williams, a 1982 Campbell Award finalist and author of four novels so far in the Pell Bar Cycle, is an English professor at a small Midwestern University.
Williams allows that his approach to science fiction is different from that of most writers.
I come at science fiction from a different angle from most people, you know, out of much more of a literary background than most science fiction writers, and particularly out of American lit.
So I think my books tend to bridge the two types a little more than most books do.
The novels of the Pell Bar Cycle, The Breaking of North Wall, The Ends of the Circle, The Dome in the Forest, and The Fall of the Shell describe America some 1000 years from now in the aftermath of a nuclear war.
The descendants of the survivors have gathered in the tribes with various lifestyles. Some are wanderers, hunter-gatherers much like the American Indians. Others have built cities where they remain year-round. The city cultures are the most sophisticated societies, though they are still quite primitive.
At the time of the novels, Williams focuses on the Three River region a few miles north-northwest of St. Louis. The cities of North Wall and Pell Barg and Lye along the present-day Mississippi. Animosity among the wandering tribes and the city dwellers is high. Skirmishes are frequent.
We ask Williams why he centered the saga around this area of the Midwest.
I've lived here two miles downriver from where I put Pell Bargain down for 18 years, and I'm utterly fascinated with this area of the United States. I think I became that way when I was way back in high school I read Bernard Devoto's book, Course of Empire, which is mostly about the Louisiana Purchase and the movement of the
Westward, especially Lewis and Clark, in their expedition. And the place has always had a sense of drama to me around here. And also, this particular area has a fantastic archaeological history. It's the one area in all of North America that has the most, the densest Indian or prehistoric population.
And I've done a good deal of study of archaeology too. It just seemed like a natural place to put a rather settled civilization or culture, rather, and have these others impinge upon it.
Individuals in the various tribes compose poems and songs. We ask Williams if the lyrics which appear in the novels are his own.
Yes, they're all original. And some of them are, you know, really just quatrains or hymn stanzas. There's nothing terribly remarkable. I tried to, especially in the breaking of North Wall, use a variety of styles, inventing new styles for each of the tribal groups, and that was kind of fun.
Williams considers one of the poems to be serious.
The most serious poem, I think, in all three volumes is one that is sung near the end of the dome in the forest. And that's actually a poem I've had around for years. And I think I kind of like it. It's sung by a character named Tristall.
A friend of mine told me the other day that she has just been divorced. And I guess it was a friendly divorce or something. And she copies the poem and sent it to her ex-husband, which is kind of amusing to me.
It's on page 211 of the Dome in the Forest. It starts, Goodbye, My Favorite Stranger. I think that's the most serious poem in the three books.
More about Paula Williams on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And Bill Vernon.
The Pell Bar Cycle, a series of interconnected novels written by Paula Williams, describes the beginnings of the rebuilding of civilization in Midwestern America a thousand years after a nuclear holocaust.
In the Breaking of Northwall, the first novel of the series, we learn that the inhabitable parts of America are people by various tribes whose cultures are still quite primitive.
The Pell Bar Tribe, for instance, is the most advanced. It is a matriarchal society which lives in the city of Pell Barragan.
Here Williams details the tribe's origin.
I envision the Pell Bar as a group that had been started by a woman named Amanda Pell, who had been a, she's sort of a feminist.
And she is a metallurgist, or was, for caterpillar tractor up in Peoria.
But she survived the holocaust by the fact that she was spelunking down in the Ozarks.
And it would be quite natural for her to set up a feminist society.
And I really, I sort of tried to create the Pell Bar as a settled society with what you might call a nesting instinct.
And a natural combination of self-protectiveness and non-aggressiveness, although they're certainly capable of great destructiveness.
But potentially a settled place like that becomes a kind of mother of civilization. So that was what was in my mind there.
The more primitive tribes, such as the Shumai and the Santani, are wandering tribes.
I created the Shumai and Santani out of my memories of, well in part, out of my memories of the conflict of Caesar and the Celts in Britain.
The Shumai are very Celtic in their behavior because they're enthusiastic, artistic, kind of reckless and unorganized.
Whereas the Santani are much more Roman. They organize into their star band and do everything in a pattern organized way.
And I invented some backgrounds for these groups.
The Shumai as offspring of the children of one farmer in southwestern Minnesota named Aaron Schumacher.
And the Santani, the explorer scout troop led by Antonio Santani, who was a watchmaker in Memphis, who happened to have a love of Roman history.
And they were on a field trip to a coal mine in Tennessee. And so escaped the Holocaust there and created their society along quite different lines.
Williams used historical precedents when he came up with the various weapons the tribes use.
The weapons in the breaking of North Wall really come out of local archeology because during most of post-glacial Indian history in this area, the Indians were users of spears only fairly recently.
Well, 2000 years ago, they began to develop bows and arrows. And that coincides with their becoming a more settled culture, adapting to agriculture and that kind of thing.
We asked Williams at what point he generated the origins of the tribes.
The strange thing about it was I figured all of this stuff out after I wrote the book. You know, I said, aha, that's where it must have come from rather than consciously adopting these things for the book.
It might sound strange, but anyway, that's how it happened.
More about Paulo Williams on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy. And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane.
In The Dome in the Forest, the third novel in the Pelbar Cycle by Paulo Williams, the primitive inhabitants of the American Midwest approximately a thousand years from now discover a technological society that has existed underground since the nuclear holocaust a thousand years in the past.
Technologically advanced, yes, but the Dome Society is bereft of feeling and intuition.
In fact, William says the theme of this novel is the clash between an emotionally dead technologically advanced society and the primitive tribes.
One of the main things I was trying to do in the book was to examine the difference between intuition and logic as a means of human understanding.
And there are certain characters in the book like Stale and Auro and like Ruth Ann, who comes from the Dome and almost immediately marries a character named Blue.
There are people who combine to a certain degree feeling and thought or intuition and logic and they very quietly succeed in advancing their societies.
But they're also extremes as represented by Tor the Shumai as a man of incredible intuition and Eelen from the Dome as a person of nearly pure logic.
And those two really ought to get together, but they sort of instinctively also distrust each other.
And in the end, well, in the book, Pelbargan goes through a severe internal struggle as to whether to accept the Dome people into their society.
And in essence, the struggle to me is whether or not the society is going to turn from being essentially a religious society to being much more of a technological society.
And they decide in favor of technology, but it's not entirely a victory.
Characters that are completely logical or completely intuitive do not thrive in a mixed society.
As the book continues, we see the logical people, the merely logical people continually making gross mistakes.
And the intuitional people, but particularly Tor, finding less and less of a place in the Central Society of the Heart River, that is Pelbar.
And in the end, Tor and his nephew are sort of coughed up. They leave. They go essentially exploring, which is what intuition tends to do.
One is struck by the cover of the Dome in the Forest. The text actually describes it.
When we ask Williams if the artist had carefully read the book then painted the cover, he told us this was not so.
The Dome in the Forest cover, though, did not really come about as you anticipated. It's kind of an odd story.
Because when I was halfway through the book and I talked to my editor about what it was going to be of light, he told me,
we have this cover sitting around here and we don't know what we're going to use it for. Would you mind if I send it to you to see if you like it for your book?
And so he did. And I like the cover very much. And so I actually wrote the cover into that scene near the end of the book.
Williams feels strongly that a culture can survive only if it nurtures social growth as well as technological advancement. That's what the Pelbar cycle is all about.
In a sense, I'm trying through the series to indicate, I hope realistically, but to indicate anyway, that if social growth happens in conjunction with technological growth,
we're going to do a whole lot better than if we simply give ourselves to technology.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy. And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Ayn and David Carson. Many works of science fiction deal was enobiology, where life which is evolved somewhere besides the Earth.
In the science fiction tradition, we have life ranging from lowly plant forms which yield pharmaceuticals or immortality drugs to bug-eyed monsters with a taste for voluptuous earth women.
But what do scientists think about the possibility of life on other planets? We asked Robert Fowler, a practicing scientist and science fiction writer.
The fact that the empty space between stars is full of organic compounds, which just seem to be formed naturally by carbon and hydrogen and oxygen and a little bit of starlight and lots of time,
sort of seems to me that this stuff that exists out between stars ought to exist just as well on the surface of planets and so forth.
And so that I really firmly believe that there's lots of life out there because it just sort of seems to form naturally.
And we have physical evidence of it from the molecular spectra we get, not from planets. We don't have any evidence that there's any organic material on planets except for one, ours.
But we do have plenty of evidence. There's lots of quite complex molecular materials in space, and so therefore, I mean, it would be begging the question to say that it doesn't exist on any other planet but ours.
Okay, so the possibility for life in the universe looks good. Then why haven't we been visited by intelligent beings which evolved elsewhere?
If the universe had a lot of intelligent species in it, most of them would be billions of years older than we are because we are on a second generation star.
Our star is made up of trash left over from exploding supernovas from the first generation stars. And there were a lot of intelligent beings.
They had billions of years to sort of wander slowly at a snail's pace throughout the galaxy, and they should have been here a long time ago.
And there's no evidence for it, and we aren't finding signals.
And so there's a good deal of speculation in the scientific literature right now that there is no other intelligent race within this galaxy. We are the first.
Does Ford believe we are alone in the Milky Way Galaxy?
I don't really buy the argument because I much prefer to believe that an intelligent being, say, a thousand or a million years, especially a billion years older than we are, has better sense than to come and say hello to us.
And the reason for that is that what does a civilization that's a million years older or a billion years older than we are, what can they gain from us?
The only thing they can gain from us is to watch us as we develop, to see if we develop in a different direction than they did, and find something new that they didn't find because they evolved from an intelligently point in a different direction.
If they contaminated us with one single evidence, one single clue, that there existed a billion year old race out there, our present course of development would be immediately diverted to try and track theirs, and we would miss whatever new that we might find.
So there's a very strong reason for an intelligent, ancient, intelligent species to leave us absolutely alone because otherwise we're of no value to them.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you for watching.